This video is brought to you by my patrons.
If you’d like to support my channel and
get access to extra like audio commentaries,
patron-exclusive podcasts, and uncut videos,
you can join by clicking the link in the description.
So I’ve been reading a lot of queer YA books
over the last few years.
I didn’t know the genre even existed until
the movie Love, Simon came out.
I ordered the book its based on, Simon and
the Homo Sapian Agenda, from Amazon and then
suddenly my suggested feed was filled with
gay YA from authors like Rainbow Rowel, Alex
London, Shaun David Hutchinson, and Caleb
Roehrig.
So, I started plowing through this small library
of queer YA books, diving ever deeper into
a world where amazingly complex thriller-type
plots happened in the lives of gay teenagers.
Ah, what an uneventful life I had led.
Of course there were plenty more…
“slice of life” books about queer teens
discovering themselves and going on to have
these *perfect* little relationships and these
*perfect* little lives.
Which I’ve become unable to read lately
because my brain just can't process that amount
of fantasy anymore.
Witches, warlocks, and magic rings are one
thing.
But perfectly happy queer people?
My suspension of disbelief can only go so
far.
And while becoming an expert on gay YA, Amazon
continually recommended I read Heartstopper
by Alice Oseman.
But I couldn’t bring myself to order it
because I just had no interest in reading
graphic novels that weren’t about superheroes.
I have nothing against comic books, I have
a shelf filled with thousands of dollars worththem,
but I just didn’t see how anything but superheroes,
and maybe the odd Saga, could work as a comic
book.
And then I discovered manga.
And so thanks to the black and white art of
No. 6, Demon Slayer, and Attack on Titan,
my appetite for comics not trying to look
like Jim Lee drew them began to grow.
And then I saw the trailer for the Netflix
adaptation of Heartstopper and gave in.
I went to my local bookstore and bought the
three volumes they had in stock.
Unbeknownst to me that a Volume 4 exists,
which I couldn't find anywhere but stumbled
across at Toys R’ Us of all places.
So what is Heartstopper?
It’s a comic book, originally published
as a web toon, about two queer teenagers,
Charlie and Nick, who find themselves falling
in love with each other despite Nick being
presumed straight by everyone in their school.
He’s bisexual, by the way.
Dorky Charlie gets to date rugby-playing Nick…
which is beyond a gay wish fulfillment fantasy…
but I couldn’t stop reading it because it
was just so damn cute and innocent.
Spoilers ahead, by the way.
Like I said, I’ve read a lot of gay YA.
But plenty of those books dealt heavily with
homophobia, conversion therapy, violence,
and even murder.
Like most of the books I read.
So I was honestly caught off guard by the
simple purity of Heartstopper.
It’s a testament to Oseman’s writing that
they managed to make a story as innocent as
this, and yet completely un-put-down-able.
I think a big part of it, as least for me,
is that the characters aren’t obsessed with
jumping into bed together as soon as they
start dating.
A lot of queer YA features some very horny
protagonists, which is fine, but I never got
laid as a teenager so it just comes across
as forced, at least to me.
While Charlie and Nick get their kicks from
just hugging and kissing each other.
This may come from Oseman being aromantic
and asexual, and so they’re not trying to
make up for their lost years as a horny teenager
who missed out on all the sex that we’d
been promised by shows like Gossip Girl and
90210.
Do people even know what 90210 is anymore?
But the story isn’t completely void of tension.
Our main characters do deal with real life
problems that do effect plenty of people in
the real queer community.
Homophobia, fear of coming out, being unsure
of their sexuality, and even eating disorders.
The main character, Charlie, has developed
anorexia over the last couple of years because,
while his life seemed to spin out of control
after being outed, how much he ate seemed
like the one thing that he could fully control.
Which spiraled into unhealthy eating habits,
and then barely eating at all.
And while, in Charlie’s case, the eating
disorder grew out of a need for a sense of
control, in real life eating disorders run
rampant in the gay male community.
Since all of our role models tend to be actors
and singers brave enough to come out, we tend
to idolize people who also have personal trainers,
dieticians, and talented airbrush artists
who can make them look their best whenever
they’re shirtless.
And who starve and dehydrate themselves for
days before a photoshoot to make sure they
look as ripped as possible.
It’s an ever-growing problem in the queer
community, especially for queer men, that
I’m probably going to make a video about
at some point because I absolutely have body
image problems.
One of my favorite things about Heartstopper
(the graphic novel) was that at one point
our main duo go to the beach with friends
and Nick, the rugby playing heart throb, is
drawn to have a little bit of a belly.
Or at least isn’t shredded like he walked
out of an episode of Riverdale.
That’s when I realized that, though the
author isn’t a gay man themself, they get
it.
Meaning they understood some of the most prominent
issues boiling up in the gay male community
besides coming out and homophobia.
That, even for queer teenagers, there are
a lot more issues they need to deal with.
Hell, even for queer adults.
Something else that popped up during the course
of the initial four volumes was that you never
really get to stop coming out.
Once Nick has realized he’s bisexual, he
has to come out multiple times for multiple
people.
Friends, family, acquaintances, teachers.
Which is something a lot of queer media doesn’t
really deal with.
We don’t come out once, have a big revelatory
moment of “I’m queer!”
And then it’s over and done with.
We come out over and over again throughout
our lives, and it doesn’t really get easier
as you get older.
Sure the big stresses of coming out to your
friends and family can be taken care of when
you’re relatively young.
But every time you make a new friend, get
a new job, the coming out process happens
all over again.
And the anxiety of “How will this person
react” continually rears its ugly head.
Luckily in Heartstopper, pretty much every
coming out situation that we see is a relatively
positive one, since we’re only really seeing
Nick come out.
(Though his big brother is a bit of a dick.)
But throughout we’re not given the impression
that coming out is all candy and roses for
everyone.
Charlie’s coming out was rough.
He was accidentally outed by a friend instead
of making the decision for himself, and the
resulting bullying has left him with no small
amount of trauma associated with it.
Even going so far as to hurt himself.
And again, Heartstopper manages to remain
sweet, while dealing with topics like self
harm, because it was, for the most part, in
the past.
We meet Charlie after things have gotten better
for him, though the scars, both mentally and
physically, still remain.
So Oseman is able to acknowledge these traumatic
parts of coming out… the bullying, the homophobia…
without the sweet love story of these two
boys becoming bogged down with it.
Though, even in the current timeline of the
story, it doesn’t entirely back away from
dealing with more serious issues.
Once Charlie’s eating disorder has been
discovered by Nick, he carefully attempts
to help Charlie deal with it, but quickly
realizes that he’s out of his depth when
it comes to this kind of mental health situation.
Charlie doesn’t want to talk to his parents
about it because he’s convinced that they’ll
think he’s just looking for attention but,
with Nick’s help, does eventually talk to
them and gets the help that he needs.
It’s not easy though.
He actually enters a mental health institution
once it's discovered that his anorexia has
gotten so bad that he’s begun fainting.
But we don’t dwell on this negativity.
That’s not what Heartstopper is.
Oseman isn’t writing a story about trauma,
but a story about doing your best to live
your life despite the trauma.
Saying, yes, these things exist.
Homophobia, eating disorders, mental health
issues — they exist — and they need to
be dealt with.
But they don’t drag the reader through hell
to establish this.
And yet, it’s not sugar coated either: Charlie
doesn’t finish his stint in the hospital
and then suddenly his eating disorder is taken
care of.
It’s an active part of the story going forward,
but not THE story going forward.
Something else I was surprised by was that
Charlie’s whole story doesn’t revolve
around Nick, as exemplified by his mental
health issues.
He’s also dealing with a strained relationship
with his parents, especially his mother.
And Nick’s story doesn’t revolve around
Charlie.
Nick is also dealing with the slow progression
of his own friend group becoming more accepting.
He’s dealing with a father who lives in
another country and doesn’t make much of
an effort to connect with his son.
He’s dealing with a dickhead of an older
brother.
And both boys are dealing with school work
and grades.
Heartstopper really started to remind me of
an ongoing British television drama.
Something that lasts for years where you can
follow the characters across many story arcs,
character progressions, and milestones in
life.
Instead of just being about a secluded period
of time where “the story” takes place.
Which is something you can actually do with
ongoing media like comics or television.
Forms of media that can focus more on character
than anything else.
Where as movies and novels, for the most part,
are focused on plots.
Act structure: beginnings, middles, and ends.
But comics give you more leeway.
They also allow you to explore character aside
from the main pair.
Heartstopper has a broad cast of characters
including friends, siblings, parents, and
teachers.
And a lot of them, to my delight, were also
queer.
Tara and Darcy are a lesbian couple, and friends
with Charlie and Nick.
They start out as a safe space - Characters
with whom Charlie and Nick can admit to being
a couple while Nick figures out exactly how
he’s supposed to come out.
But as the story progresses we get to learn
more about the pair.
Tara is smart, emotionally solid, and comes
from a loving home.
While Darcy is chaotic and fun, but comes
from a bad home life, where her parents verbally
abuse her because of her sexuality and personality.
There’s also Elle, a trans girl who used
to go to the same school as Charlie and Nick
before transitioning and transferring to an
all girls school.
For the most part she’s portrayed as an
upbeat, happy character, but through dialogue
we do find out that she was mercilessly bullied
after transitioning, and isn’t even able
to visit her close relatives in Egypt because
of the country’s laws regarding trans people.
And then there’s Ben, an asshole who used
Charlie to get his gay kicks while being unwilling
to come out of the closet himself.
Emotionally abusive, toxic, and entirely full
of himself, Ben is as close to a persistent
antagonist as you get in Heartstopper.
Even Harry, who initially bullies Nick and
especially Charlie, comes around.
But Ben just keeps on being a dick.
Ben actually shows up in other works that
Alice Oseman has written as well.
You see, Oseman has created their own universe
of sorts, with multiple comics, novels, novellas,
and short stories all taking place in the
same world about different characters.
Such as Solitaire, Radio Silence, I Was Born
for This, and This Winter.
Aspects from each work overlap into the others,
but never take over the story.
This kind of reminds of me the many prime
time soap spin offs of the 1980s, with characters
from Dallas sometimes popping up on Knotts
Landing, and characters from Dynasty finding
their way into The Colby’s.
I thought the 90210 reference was dated.
Oseman is creating a sort of Marvel Cinematic
Universe for queer British youth.
Anyway, all of this is to say that this weekend,
on April 22 in the year 2022 to be exact,
Netflix released the Heartstopper streaming
series.
Starring age-appropriate actors Joe Locke
and Kit Conner as Charlie and Nick respectively.
And trans actress Yasmin Finney as Elle.
And the adorable sweetness of the comics has
transferred perfectly over to the screen.
And this series, in my opinion, came at the
absolute perfect time.
Because the bigots aren't even trying to hide
their hate anymore.
They’re coming back out of their closets.
As, I’m sure, you’re very well aware,
several states across America have currently
gotten into a ‘mood’ and have decided
they’d like to go back to the 1970s (please
and thank-you) and stop people from acknowledging
the existence of queer people around, basically,
anyone under the age of consent.
And even then they’d like us to keep our
queer mouths shut as much as possible.
On a similar keel, the UK is also engaging
in heated discussions about trans rights,
investing a great deal of political power
in exempting trans identities from bills designed
to protect other queer people.
Why?
Because we’re apparently unsafe to have
around children.
The more backward thinking people even think
that we groom kids.
That by allowing media to exist in a youth-friendly
zone that doesn’t demonize queer characters,
we are covertly warping their fragile little
minds into thinking that they, themselves,
are queer.
Reminds me of something…
At a public hearing in Dade County, Florida,
parents were enraged.
The nation, they said, was in peril, and children
were at risk.
All because of the increasing rights of LGBTQ
people in their communities.
Well, not THEIR communities, they’d argue,
but communities around them.
Action had to be taken, and a campaign to
limit the legal rights of LGBTQ people — all
in the name of protecting children — was
enacted.
A woman who spoke at this hearing said it
was her right to control “the moral atmosphere
in which my children grow up.”
The year was 1977 and that woman was Anita
Bryant, a former Miss Oklahoma best known
for her Florida orange juice commercials.
Bryant spearheaded an anti-queer campaign
of such impact that it still echoes in today’s
rhetoric.
“It’s a contemporary version on these
older attempts to annul homosexuality,”
said Lillian Faderman, author of ‘The Gay
Revolution.’
“In the present environment, you can’t
go after homosexual teachers anymore.
We have too many allies.
And so Florida has found another way to do
it by this ‘Don’t Say Gay’ bill, which
doesn’t go after homosexual teachers precisely.
But the idea is the same.
That is, that homosexuality is a pariah status,
and it shouldn’t be discussed in the public
schools.”
When Bryant began her campaign in 1977, she
had four children, and often said she was
speaking as “a mother and a Christian.”
And while the villainization of queer people
was not new, Bryant took the idea of protecting
children from us and made it mainstream.
Her campaign and the subsequent “Save Our
Children” political coalition used the argument
that: “homosexuals cannot reproduce, so
they must recruit.”
I want to know what pills these people are
popping.
If we actually had the power to turn people
gay do you think for a second we wouldn’t
have abducted Chris Evans and forced him to
watch Death Becomes Her on a loop, like Clockwork
Orange style by now?
“En garde…
BITCH.”
Anyway.
Opposition to Bryant’s campaign, and the
anti-gay bills across America that ended up
passing because of it, led to a rise in queer
activism.
“The thing to remember is that Anita Bryant
won that battle initially, but she did not
win that war,” said the historian Julio
Capó Jr.
“It was transformative.
It got people to see themselves as a voting
bloc.
It got them to see that their very existence
and their rights were very much under attack
in a different way than we had seen in a decade
prior.”
Though the times have changed significantly
since Bryant’s heyday in the late ‘70s,
it appears the views of her kind of bigot
have not.
From American suburbs to a castle in Edinburgh,
Scotland, the close-minded still fight to
restrict our rights.
Which is why I think this new Netflix show
is so important.
But before we get on our knees and praise
Netflix to the high heavens for deigning to
provide us with queer content, bear in mind
that this is the same studio that aired Dave
Chapelle’s comedy special that lacked for
comedy but was abundant in hot takes that
nobody asked for.
And after refusing to remove the special,
suffering employee walk-outs, and enduring
an all-too-short-lived stretch of bad press,
they signed Chapelle on for another multi-million
dollar deal.
Which puts us, audiences and queer people,
in a tough situation.
The same situation we’ve been in since about
the 1990s, give or take a decade.
Is it worth a Dave Chapelle comedy special
to get content like Heartstopper, Young Royals,
and the relatively large library of queer
content on Netflix?
From a business point of view, these queer
shows are very popular on their own.
Can we even make the argument that the subscribers
brought in by Dave Chapelle are what fund
these projects?
Or are the queer shows what have given Netflix
the money to be able to greenlight and buy
up his specials?
Let’s not forget that Orange is the New
Black was one of Netflix’s first big hits.
Are we dependent on bigotry for our representation?
Are we okay seeing the money we bring in be
used to provide a platform for intolerance?
Is Netflix just playing the field?
One for us, one for them?
Even that thinking is flawed.
Bigotry doesn’t have a right to an equal
platform with queer representation.
Because queer representation seeks to promote
and celebrate the existence of PEOPLE — bigotry
seeks to limit and revoke the freedoms of
those people.
One group of people wants to exist in peace
— the other wants that first group to not
exist at all.
Advancing the progress of queer rights will
not hurt anyone.
Advancing the rights of bigotry will hurt
people.
Advancing both at the same time will result
in a reduction of rights, freedoms, and safety
for queer people — which is why bigots invent
arguments that claim that the queer agenda
is out to disrupt social spaces.
And this just happens to be the political
landscape we’re currently living in.
And because we’re giving airtime to both
groups, it makes sense that queer rights are
losing ground.
And not to be an alarmist, but we ARE losing
ground.
Conservatives are successfully banning the
existence of queer people from anywhere children
exist, and people who have convinced themselves
that they’re feminists want to erase the
existence of trans people from…
well, existence.
So for a show to come out directed toward
teens and preteens that shows queer characters
as, not only human beings, but normal human
beings…
with normal problems.
With friends and families who care about them.
Gay teens, bisexual teens, trans teens, lesbian
teens.
This feels like a big deal.
The producers probably didn’t think it would
be as big a deal as it is when they first
bought the rights, all the way back in 2019,
but it is.
What could have been just a cute little show
about queer teens living their lives has inadvertently
become a middle finger to the bigots stretching
their arms across the US and the UK.
Heartstopper is sweet, adorable, sometimes
painfully corny, and exactly what we need
right now.
Between this and Our Flag Means Death, I’m
actually starting to have hope in Western
Media’s portrayals of queer characters.
Let’s keep this trend going and put the
bigots back in
the closet.